---
layout: default
title: Prof. Peters' Notes
---

# Notes on Hegel: Sin, Evil, and the Master

There are a series of issues here. One is Hegel's overall theodicy according to which sin is not radically unintelligible but only relatively unintelligible and so can, at least retrospectively, be understood as constitutive of some larger good. Thus, for Hegel, viewed retrospectively, the historical atrocity of slavery was a necessary moment in the development of Spirit since, without this compulsion, Spirit would not have learned restrain its immediate desire and thereby sublate it into labor. We'll discuss all of that. But, for the moment, we might note that one approach would be simply to critique Hegel's view of the nature of sin/evil. Christians would do this by arguing that sin as sin is a mere principle of decline and so cannot be incorporated or sublated into a larger good. Beckett has an exceptional sense of this, although, for him, the totality of existence is unintelligible not just sin. A good recent study of the radical unintelligibility of sin/evil is the A24 film "The Witch." There is no sublation of sin/evil in "The Witch," just an irrational, unintelligible descent into disorder, confusion, and desolation.

As for Hegel's position as a master, that will be complicated by, among other things, the fact that, as it turns out, for Hegel, the primary or at least initial locus of the master-slave dialectic turns out to be not that which would have obtained between two (or more) distinct historical human individuals but the internal dialectic between two aspects of a single self-consciousness. Thus, we can, at least temporarily, bracket the question of Hegel's view of the historical significance of the institution of slavery and examine how the dialectic of domination and servitude is experienced within a single self-consciousness. Hegel's own Christian background is important to recall here since, for Hegel, Christ, as the "hypostatic union" of two natures (God and man) in one person, is prototypical of the sublation of lordly/masterful and servile consciousness in one person. Moreover, Hegel will have been aware of the Christian/Pauline reversal according to which, in allowing their immediate appetites to overcome their reason, the masters are themselves slaves to sin.
If anyone wants to go really wild before Thursday, here's a piece in which I make the case that the master-slave dialectic, in the first instance at least, occurs within a single self-consciousness.